Preface 
=======

The transition to 5G is happening, and unless you’ve been actively
trying to ignore it, you’ve likely heard the hype. But if you are like
99% of the CS-trained, systems-oriented, cloud-savvy, code-writing,
IETF-participating people in the world, the cellular network is
largely a mystery. You know it’s an important technology used in the
last mile to connect people to the Internet, but you’ve otherwise
abstracted it out of your scope-of-concerns. 

The important thing to understand about 5G is that it implies much more 
than a generational upgrade in bandwidth. It involves transformative 
changes that blur the line between the access network and the cloud. And 
it will encompass enough value that it has the potential to turn the 
“Access-as-frontent-to-Internet” perspective on its head. We will just as 
likely be talking about “Internet-as-backend-to-Access” ten years from 
now. 

This book is written for someone that has a working understanding of the 
Internet and Cloud, but has had limited success penetrating the myriad 
of acronyms that dominate cellular networking. In fairness, the Internet 
has its share acronyms, but it also comes with a sufficient set of 
abstractions to help manage the complexity. It’s hard to say the same 
for the cellular network, where pulling on one thread seemingly unravels 
the entire space. It has also been the case that the cellular network 
had been largely hidden inside proprietary devices, which has made it 
impossible to figure it out for yourself. 

This book is the result of a cellular networking expert teaching a 
systems person about 5G as we’ve collaborated on an open source 5G 
implementation. The material has been used to train other software 
developers, and we are hopeful it will be useful to anyone that wants a 
deeper understanding of 5G and the opportunity for innovation it 
provides. Readers that want hands-on experience can also access the open 
source software introduced in the book. 

This book will likely be a work-in-progress for the foreseeable future. 
It’s not intended to be encyclopedic—favoring perspective and end-to-end 
completeness over every last bit of detail—but we do plan to flesh out 
the content over time. Your suggestions (and contributions) to this end 
are welcome. 

| Larry Peterson and Oguz Sunay 
| Open Networking Foundation 
| August 2019 
